DOCS-1108: Add tutorial for full E2E GPS navigation (#1904)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/tutorials/services/navigate-with-rover-base.md

mode, err := myNav.SetMode(context.Background(), Mode.MODE_WAYPOINT, nil)
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Python" %}}

```python
my_nav = NavigationClient.from_robot(robot=robot, name="my_nav_service")

# Set the Mode the service is operating in to MODE_WAYPOINT and begin
# navigation
await my_nav.set_mode(Mode.ValueType.MODE_WAYPOINT)
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Next steps: automate obstacle detection

In this tutorial, you have learned how to use Navigation to navigate across waypoints.
Now, you can make navigation even better with automated obstacle detection.

First, configure a depth [camera](/components/camera) that your robot can sense how far away it is from obstacles.

We configured ours as an [Intel RealSense Camera](https://www.intelrealsense.com/depth-camera-d435/), which is available as a [modular resource](/extend/modular-resources/) [in the Viam registry](https://app.viam.com/module/viam/realsense):

![An example configuration for an Intel RealSense camera in the Viam app Config Builder.](/tutorials/navigate-with-rover-base/realsense-camera-config-builder.png)

{{< alert title="Tip" color="tip" >}}

> You could also use an [`ultrasonic` sensor](/components/sensor/ultrasonic) configured as a camera.

Author: ```suggestion
You can alternatively use an [`ultrasonic` sensor](/components/sensor/ultrasonic) configured as a camera.
```

# Set the Mode the service is operating in to MODE_WAYPOINT and begin
# navigation
await my_nav.set_mode(Mode.ValueType.MODE_WAYPOINT)
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Next steps: automate obstacle detection

In this tutorial, you have learned how to use Navigation to navigate across waypoints.
Now, you can make navigation even better with automated obstacle detection.

First, configure a depth [camera](/components/camera) that your robot can sense how far away it is from obstacles.

We configured ours as an [Intel RealSense Camera](https://www.intelrealsense.com/depth-camera-d435/), which is available as a [modular resource](/extend/modular-resources/) [in the Viam registry](https://app.viam.com/module/viam/realsense):

![An example configuration for an Intel RealSense camera in the Viam app Config Builder.](/tutorials/navigate-with-rover-base/realsense-camera-config-builder.png)

{{< alert title="Tip" color="tip" >}}

You can alternatively use an [`ultrasonic` sensor](/components/sensor/ultrasonic) configured as a camera.
Attribute information for an `ultrasonic` [camera](/components/camera) is the same as [for a sensor](/components/sensor/ultrasonic).

{{< /alert >}}

> Now, if you want the robot to be able to automatically detect obstacles in front of it, [configure a Vision service](/services/vision/#configuration) segmenter.

Author: ```suggestion
Now, if you want the robot to be able to automatically detect obstacles in front of it, [configure a Vision service segmenter](/services/vision/segmentation/).
```

---
title: "Navigate with a Rover Base"
linkTitle: "Navigate with a Rover"
type: "docs"
description: "Introduction to using a rover base with the navigation service."
image: "/tutorials/navigate-with-rover-base/leo-in-office.png"
imageAlt: "The leo rover navigating in the Viam Lab."
images: ["/tutorials/navigate-with-rover-base/leo-in-office.png"]
tags:
  [
    "try viam",
    "navigation",
    "movement sensor",
    "vision",
    "motion",
    "movement sensor",
    "base",
    "rover",
    "motion planning",
    "obstacles",
    "waypoints",
  ]
authors: ["Sierra Guequierre"]
languages: ["python", "go"]

> viamresources: ["navigation", "base", "movement sensor"]

Reviewer: this needs to use the names as in the configuration - otherwise the selection UI won't work
```suggestion
viamresources: ["navigation", "base", "movement_sensor"]
```

Author: Thank you, done!

---
title: "Navigate with a Rover Base"
linkTitle: "Navigate with a Rover"
type: "docs"
description: "Introduction to using a rover base with the navigation service."
image: "/tutorials/navigate-with-rover-base/leo-in-office.png"
imageAlt: "The leo rover navigating in the Viam Lab."
images: ["/tutorials/navigate-with-rover-base/leo-in-office.png"]
tags:
  [
    "try viam",
    "navigation",
    "movement sensor",
    "vision",
    "motion",
    "movement sensor",
    "base",
    "rover",
    "motion planning",
    "obstacles",
    "waypoints",
  ]
authors: ["Sierra Guequierre"]
languages: ["python", "go"]
viamresources: ["navigation", "base", "movement_sensor"]
level: "Intermediate"
date: "2023-02-08"
# updated: ""
cost: "0"
no_list: true
weight: 4
# SMEs: Ray Bjorkman, Fahmina
---

> One key feature of Viam is [Navigation](/manage/data/), the stateful definition of Viam's [motion service](/services/motion/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One key feature of Viam is [navigation](/services/navigation/), the stateful definition of Viam's [motion service](/services/motion/).
```

> Using Navigation, you can queue up user-defined waypoints and expect your robot to move to them in the order that you specify.

Reviewer: Bit strange to say they can expect their robot to do that. It makes me immediately go - will it... not do that? 
```suggestion
Using Navigation, you can queue up user-defined waypoints and your robot willl move to them in the order that you specify.
```

   {{<imgproc src="/tutorials/navigate-with-rover-base/leo-in-office.png" resize="500x" declaredimensions=true alt="Leo rover that is navigating using the navigation service in a robotics lab.">}}

2. **A movement sensor with GPS position and angular and linear velocity readings**

   We used three movement sensors to satisfy these requirements:

   1. A [SparkFun GPS-RTK-SMA Breakout](https://www.sparkfun.com/products/16481) [movement sensor](/components/movement-sensor/) configured as a [`gps-nmea-rtk-serial`](/components/movement-sensor/gps/gps-nmea-rtk-serial/) model, providing GPS position measurements.
   2. A [`wheeled-odometry`](/components/movement-sensor/wheeled-odometry/) model gathering angular and linear velocity information from the [encoders](/components/encoder/) wired to our base's [motors](/components/motor/).
   3. A [`merged`](/components/movement-sensor/merged/) model aggregating the readings together for the navigation service to consume.

{{% alert title="Tip" color="tip" %}}

> If you are using different hardware than us, the navigation setup process will be mostly the same, but you will need to substitute your robot's components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are using different hardware, the navigation setup process will be mostly the same, but you will need to substitute your robot's components.
```

Author: done

{{% /alert %}}

Before you start, make sure to create a robot in [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and [install `viam-server`](/installation/) on your robot.

## Configure the components you need

First, configure the components of your robot.
If you are using different _models_ of hardware, adjust your configuration accordingly.

### Configure a board with `"digital_interrupts"`

First, configure the [board](/components/board/) local to your rover.
Follow [these instructions](/components/board/#configuration) to configure your board model.

> We used a [`jetson` board](/components/board/jetson/), but you can use whatever model of board you have on hand, as the [resource's API](/components/board/#api) is hardware agnostic.

Reviewer: whatever is slightly too colloquial I think
```suggestion
We used a [`jetson` board](/components/board/jetson/), but you can use any model of board you have on hand, as the [resource's API](/components/board/#api) is hardware agnostic.
```

Author: Ok makes sense, done

> Configure a board named `local` as shown below:

Reviewer: Adding numbers to these steps makes it harder for people to forget one (like the save one)
```suggestion
1. Configure a board named `local` as shown below:
```

Author: Done, thank you for inline!

![Configuration of a jetson board with digital interrupts in the Viam app config builder.](/tutorials/navigate-with-rover-base/board-config-builder.png)

> Configure [digital interrupts](/components/board/#digital_interrupts) on your board to signal precise GPIO state changes to the [encoders](/components/encoder/) on your rover base.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Configure [digital interrupts](/components/board/#digital_interrupts) on your board to signal precise GPIO state changes to the [encoders](/components/encoder/) on your rover base.
```

Author: Done

Copy and paste the following into your board's **Attributes** to add [digital interrupts](/components/board/#digital_interrupts) on pins `31`, `29`, `23`, and `21`:

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
{
  "digital_interrupts": [
    {
      "name": "ra",
      "pin": "31"
    },
    {
      "pin": "29",
      "name": "rb"
    },
    {
      "pin": "23",
      "name": "lb"
    },
    {
      "name": "la",
      "pin": "21"
    }
  ]
}
```

> Save your config.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Save your config.
```

### Configure a rover base with encoded motors

> Now, configure your rover base to act as the moving platform of the navigating robot.

Reviewer: Let's remove some of the ones that aren't really needed.
```suggestion
Configure your rover base to act as the moving platform of the navigating robot.
```

Author: Ok, sounds good. Will try to keep this in mind

2.  Now that you've got movement sensors which can give you GPS position and linear and angular velocity readings, configure a `merged` movement sensor to aggregate the readings from our other movement sensors into a singular sensor:

    ![An example configuration for a merged movement sensor in the Viam app Config Builder.](/tutorials/navigate-with-rover-base/merged-movement-sensor-config-builder.png)

    We named ours `merged`.
    Refer to [the `merged` movement sensor documentation](/components/movement-sensor/merged/) for attribute information.

    - Make sure your `merged` movement sensor is configured to gather `"position"` readings from the `gps` movement sensor.
    - [Configure the frame system](/services/frame-system/#configuration) for this movement sensor so that the navigation service knows where it is in relation to the base.
      Click on **Add frame** on the **Config** tab, and, if your movement sensor is mounted on top of the rover like ours is, set **Orientation**'s **Z** to `1`.
      Select the `base` as the parent frame.

### Full JSON Configuration

> Now, at this point, if you switch to **Raw JSON** mode in your robot's **Config** tab, the full `"components"` array should look similar to the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, if you switch to **Raw JSON** mode in your robot's **Config** tab, the full `"components"` array should look similar to the following:
```

Author: done

          "value": {
            "z": 1,
            "th": 0,
            "x": 0,
            "y": 0
          },
          "type": "ov_degrees"
        },
        "parent": "base",
        "translation": {
          "y": 0,
          "z": 0,
          "x": 0
        }
      },
      "model": "merged"
    },
    {
      "attributes": {
        "board": "local",
        "pins": {
          "b": "lb",
          "a": "la"
        }
      },
      "depends_on": [],
      "name": "l-encoder",
      "type": "encoder",
      "model": "incremental"
    },
    {
      "type": "encoder",
      "model": "incremental",
      "attributes": {
        "board": "local",
        "pins": {
          "b": "rb",
          "a": "ra"
        }
      },
      "depends_on": [],
      "name": "r-encoder"
    },
    {
      "model": "wheeled-odometry",
      "type": "movement_sensor",
      "namespace": "rdk",
      "attributes": {
        "base": "base",
        "left_motors": [
          "left-motor"
        ],
        "right_motors": [
          "right-motor"
        ]
      },
      "depends_on": [],
      "name": "enc-linear"
    }
]
```

{{% /expand%}}

## Configure a Navigation service

> Now, add the navigation service so that your wheeled base can navigate between waypoints and avoid obstacles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the navigation service so that your wheeled base can navigate between waypoints and avoid obstacles.
```

To add the navigation service to your robot, do the following:

1. On your robot's **Config** page, navigate to the **Services** tab.
2. At the bottom of the page, create a service.
   Choose `Navigation` as the type.
3. Then click **Create Service**.
4. Select **Raw JSON** mode. Copy and paste the following into your new service's `"attributes"`:

   ```json
   {
     "base": "base",
     "movement_sensor": "merged",
     "obstacles": [],
     "store": {
       "type": "memory"
     },
     "position_polling_frequency": 2,
     "meters_per_sec": 1.2,
     "degs_per_sec": 90,
     "plan_deviation_m": 0.25
   }
   ```

   Edit the attributes as applicable.
   Attribute information is available in [the navigation service documentation](/services/navigation/#configuration).

5. Click **Save Config** at the bottom of the window.

Your navigation service should now appear in your robot's **Config** tab as a card with a map like the following:

![Navigation Card](/tutorials/navigate-with-rover-base/navigation-config-builder.png)

For more detailed information see [the navigation service](/services/navigation/#configuration).

### Full JSON Configuration

> Now, at this point, if you switch to **Raw JSON** mode in your robot's **Config** tab, the full `"services"` array should look similar to the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, if you switch to **Raw JSON** mode in your robot's **Config** tab, the full `"services"` array should look similar to the following:
```

{{%expand "Click to view full example JSON" %}}

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
"services": [
  {
    "name": "nav",
    "type": "navigation",
    "attributes": {
    "base": "base",
    "movement_sensor": "merged",
    "obstacles": [],
    "store": {
        "type": "memory"
    },
    "position_polling_frequency": 2,
    "meters_per_sec": 1.2,
    "degs_per_sec": 90,
    "plan_deviation_m": 0.25
    }
  }
]
```

{{% /expand%}}

## Start navigating with the Navigation service

> Next, add waypoints to your navigation service.

Reviewer: Instead of starting sentences with "Now" or "Next" that do not convey any useful information as a transition - we can add transitions that help readers put together how things connect.
```suggestion
Now that you have configured your navigation service, add waypoints to your navigation service.
You can add waypoints from the [Control tab](tutorials/services/navigate-with-rover-base/#control-tab-method) or [programmatically](/tutorials/services/navigate-with-rover-base/#programmatic-method).
```

Author: Done

### Control tab method

> Then, go to the **Control** tab of your robot in the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com), and open the **navigation** card.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Go to the **Control** tab of your robot in the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com), and open the **navigation** card.
```

Add as many waypoints as you desire.
Hover over a waypoint in the left-hand menu and click the trash icon to delete a waypoint.

![Waypoint 1 being added in the Viam app config builder, further down the street](/tutorials/navigate-with-rover-base/add-second-waypoint.png)

#### (Optional) Add obstacles

If you want your robot to avoid certain obstacles in its path while navigating, you can also add obstacles.
Select **Obstacles** on the upper-left corner menu of the navigation card.
Zoom in on your current location and click on the map to add an obstacle.
Add as many obstacles as you desire.
Hover over an obstacle in the left-hand menu and click the trash icon to delete an obstacle.

#### Begin navigation

Toggle **Navigation mode** to **Waypoint**.
Your rover will begin navigating between waypoints.

{{<video webm_src="/tutorials/navigate-with-rover-base/agilex-navigation.webm" mp4_src="/tutorials/navigate-with-rover-base/agilex-navigation.mp4" alt="The agilex rover navigating outside" poster="/tutorials/navigate-with-rover-base/agilex-outside.png">}}

### Programmatic method

> If you want to do this programmatically, use the service's [API method `AddWaypoint()`](/services/navigation/#addwaypoint) like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to do add waypoints programmatically, use the service's [API method `AddWaypoint()`](/services/navigation/#addwaypoint):
```

Author: Done

# Set the Mode the service is operating in to MODE_WAYPOINT and begin
# navigation
await my_nav.set_mode(Mode.ValueType.MODE_WAYPOINT)
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Next steps: automate obstacle detection

In this tutorial, you have learned how to use Navigation to navigate across waypoints.
Now, you can make navigation even better with automated obstacle detection.

First, configure a depth [camera](/components/camera) that your robot can sense how far away it is from obstacles.

We configured ours as an [Intel RealSense Camera](https://www.intelrealsense.com/depth-camera-d435/), which is available as a [modular resource](/extend/modular-resources/) [in the Viam registry](https://app.viam.com/module/viam/realsense):

![An example configuration for an Intel RealSense camera in the Viam app Config Builder.](/tutorials/navigate-with-rover-base/realsense-camera-config-builder.png)

{{< alert title="Tip" color="tip" >}}

You can alternatively use an [`ultrasonic` sensor](/components/sensor/ultrasonic) configured as a camera.
Attribute information for an `ultrasonic` [camera](/components/camera) is the same as [for a sensor](/components/sensor/ultrasonic).

{{< /alert >}}

> Now, if you want the robot to be able to automatically detect obstacles in front of it, [configure a Vision service segmenter](/services/vision/segmentation/).

Reviewer: Just because you already have one now in close proximity
```suggestion
If you want the robot to be able to automatically detect obstacles in front of it, [configure a Vision service segmenter](/services/vision/segmentation/).
```

Author: Done

---
title: "Navigate with a Rover Base"
linkTitle: "Navigate with a Rover"
type: "docs"
description: "Introduction to using a rover base with the navigation service."

> image: "/tutorials/navigate-with-rover-base/leo-in-office.png"

Author: ```suggestion
image: "/tutorials/navigate-with-rover-base/agilex-roving.png"
```

> imageAlt: "The leo rover navigating in the Viam Lab."

Author: ```suggestion
imageAlt: "The aligex-leo rover navigating in the grass outside."
```

> images: ["/tutorials/navigate-with-rover-base/leo-in-office.png"]

Author: ```suggestion
images: ["/tutorials/navigate-with-rover-base/agilex-roving.png"]
```
